<!-- MODALITY: AUDIO
METADATA: {
  "file_size": 4312968,
  "chunk_count": 85,
  "max_chars_per_chunk": 900,
  "overlap_chars": 80,
  "language": "en",
  "backend": "faster-whisper (preferred), openai-whisper (fallback)"
}
-->

This is a Libravox recording. All Libravox recordings are in the public domain.

For more information and to find out how you can volunteer, please visit Libravox.org

Recording by Moira Fogadi

The Art of War by Sun-Zoo translated by Lionel Giles

Part 12 The Attack by Fire

Sun-Zoo said, there are five ways of attacking with fire.

The first is to burn soldiers in their camp. The second is to burn stores. The third

is to burn baggage trains. The fourth is to burn arsenals and magazines. The fifth is

to hurl dropping fire amongst the enemy.

In order to carry out an attack, we must have means available. The material for raising

fire should always be kept in readiness. There is a proper season for making attacks

with fire and special days for starting a conflagration. The proper season is when

the weather is very dry. The special days are those when the moon is in the constellations

of the sieve, the wall, the wing, or the crossbar. For these four are all days of rising

wind.

In attacking with fire, one should be prepared to meet five possible developments. One,

when fire breaks out inside to enemy's camp, respond at once with an attack from without.

Two, if there is an outbreak of fire but the enemy's soldiers remain quiet, buy your time

and do not attack. Three, when the force of the flames has reached its height, follow

it up with an attack if that is practicable. If not, stay where you are.

Four, if it is possible to make an assault with fire from without, do not wait for it

to break out within, but deliver your attack at a favorable moment.

Five, when you start a fire, be to windward of it. Do not attack from the leeward. A wind

that rises in the daytime lasts long, but a night breeze soon falls. In every army,

the five developments connected with fire must be known, the movements of the stars calculated

and a watch kept for the proper days. Hence, those who use fire as an aid to the attack

show intelligence. Those who use water as an aid to the attack gain an accession of strength.

By means of water an enemy may be intercepted but not robbed of all his belongings. Unhappy

is the fate of one who tries to win his battles and succeed in his attacks without cultivating

the spirit of enterprise, for the result is a waste of time and general stagnation. Hence

the saying, the enlightened ruler lays his plans well ahead. The good general cultivates

his resources. Move not unless you see an advantage. Use not your troops unless there is

something to be gained. Fight not unless the position is critical. No ruler should put

troops into the field merely to gratify his own spleen. No general should fight a battle

simply out of peak. If it is to your advantage, make a forward move. If not, stay where you

are. Anger may in time change to gladness. Vexation may be succeeded by content. But a

kingdom that has once been destroyed can never come again into being, nor can the dead

ever be brought back to life. Hence the enlightened ruler is heedful and the good general

full of caution. This is the way to keep a country at peace and an army intact.

End of Part 12. Part 13. The use of spies. Sonsu said, raising a host of 100,000 men and

marching them great distances and tales heavy loss on the people and a drain on the resources

of the state. The daily expenditure will amount to a thousand ounces of silver. There will

be commotion at home and abroad, and men will drop down exhausted on the highways. As many

as 700,000 families will be impeded in their labor. Hostile armies may feast each other

for years, striving for the victory which is decided in a single day. This being so, to

remain in ignorance of the enemy's conditions simply because one grudges the outlay of

a hundred ounces of silver in honors and emoluments is the height of inhumanity. One who

acts thus is no leader of men, no present help to his sovereign, no master of victory. Thus

what enables the wise sovereign and the good general to strike and conquer and achieve things

beyond the reach of ordinary men is for knowledge. Now this for knowledge cannot be elicited

from spirits. It cannot be obtained inductively from experience nor by any deductive calculation.

Knowledge of the enemy's dispositions can only be obtained from other men. Hence the use

of spies of whom there are five classes. One, local spies, two inward spies, three converted

spies, four doomed spies, five surviving spies. When these five kinds of spy are all at work

none can discover the secret system. This is called divine manipulation of the threads.

It is the sovereign's most precious faculty. Having local spies means employing the services

of the inhabitants of a district. Having inward spies, making use of officials of the enemy.

Having converted spies, getting hold of the enemy spies and using them for our own purposes.

Having doomed spies, doing certain things openly for purposes of deception and allowing our

spies to know of them and report them to the enemy. Surviving spies, finally, are those who bring

back news from the enemy's camp. Hence it is that which none in the whole army are more intimate

relations to be maintained than with spies. None should be more liberally rewarded and no other

business should greater secrecy be preserved. Spies cannot be usefully employed without a certain

intuitive sagacity. They cannot be properly managed without benevolence and straight forwardness.

Without subtle ingenuity of mind, one cannot make certain of the truth of their reports.

Be subtle, be subtle, and use your spies for every kind of business.

If a secret piece of news is divulged by a spy before the time is ripe, he must be put to death

together with the man to whom the secret was told. Whether the object be to crush an army,

to storm a city, or to assassinate an individual, it is always necessary to begin by finding out the

names of the attendants, the aides to comp, and doorkeepers and sentries of the general in command.

Our spies must be commissioned to ascertain these. The enemy's spies who have come to spy on us

must be sought out, tempted with bribes, led away, and comfortably housed. Thus they will become

converted spies and available for our service. It is through the information brought by the converted

spy that we are able to acquire and employ local and inward spies. It is owing to this information

again that we can cause the doomed spy to carry false tidings to the enemy. Lastly, it is by this

information that the surviving spy can be used on appointed occasions. The end and aim of

spying in all its five varieties is knowledge of the enemy, and this knowledge can only be

derived in the first instance from the converted spy. Hence, it is essential that the converted spy

be treated with the utmost liberality. Of old, the rise of the Yin dynasty was due to E-chi

who had served under the Sya. Likewise, the rise of the two dynasty was due to Luya who had

served under the Yin. Hence, it is only the enlightened ruler and the wise general who will use

the highest intelligence of the army for purposes of spying and thereby they achieve great results.

Spies are a most important element in water because on them depends on army's ability to move.

End of the Art of War

Recorded in Toronto, Ontario by Moira Fogarty, October 2006