<!-- MODALITY: AUDIO
METADATA: {
  "file_size": 5094335,
  "chunk_count": 146,
  "max_chars_per_chunk": 900,
  "overlap_chars": 80,
  "language": "en",
  "backend": "faster-whisper (preferred), openai-whisper (fallback)"
}
-->

This is a Libravox Recording. All Libravox recordings are in the public domain.

For more information and to find out how you can volunteer, please visit Libravox.org.

Recording by Moira Fogridi.

The Art of War by Sun-Zoo, translated by Lionel Giles.

Part 5. Energy Sun-Zoo said, the control of a large force

is the same principle as the control of a few men.

It is merely a question of dividing up their numbers.

Fighting with a large army under your command is no-wise different from fighting with a small one.

It is merely a question of instituting signs and signals.

To ensure that your whole host may withstand the brunt of the enemy's attack and remain unshaken,

this is affected by maneuvers direct and indirect.

That the impact of your army may be like a grindstone dashed against an egg.

This is affected by the science of weak points and strong.

In all fighting, the direct method may be used for joining battle, but indirect methods

will be needed in order to secure victory.

Indirect tactics, efficiently applied, are inexhaustible as heaven and earth, on ending

as the flow of rivers and streams, like the sun and moon they end but to begin anew.

Like the four seasons, they pass away to return once more.

There are not more than five musical notes, yet the combinations of these five give rise

to more melodies than can ever be heard.

There are not more than five primary colors, blue, yellow, red, white and black, yet in combination

they produce more hues than can ever be seen.

There are not more than five cardinal tastes, sour, acrid, salt, sweet, bitter, yet combinations

of them yield more flavors than can ever be tasted.

In battle, there are not more than two methods of attack, the direct and the indirect, yet

these two in combination give rise to an endless series of maneuvers.

The direct and the indirect lead on to each other in turn.

It is like moving in a circle, you never come to an end.

Who can exhaust the possibilities of their combination?

The onset of troops is like the rush of a torrent which will even roll stones along in its

course.

The quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop of a falcon which enables it to strike

and destroy its victim.

Therefore, the good fighter will be terrible in his onset and prompt in his decision.

Energy may be likened to the bending of a crossbow, decision to the releasing of a trigger.

Amid the turmoil and tumult of battle, there may be seeming disorder and yet no real disorder

at all.

Amid confusion and chaos, your array may be without head or tail, yet it will be proof

against a feat.

Simulated disorder postulates perfect discipline.

Simulated fear postulates courage.

Simulated weakness postulates strength.

Hiding order beneath the cloak of disorder is simply a question of subdivision.

Concealing courage under their show of timidity presupposes a fund of latent energy, masking

strength with weakness is to be affected by tactical dispositions.

Thus, one who is skillful at keeping the enemy on the move maintains deceitful appearances

according to which the enemy will act.

He sacrifices something that the enemy may snatch at it.

By holding out baits he keeps him on the march, then with a body of picked men he lies in

weight for him.

The clever combatant looks to the effect of combined energy and does not require too much

from individuals, hence his ability to pick out the right men and utilize combined energy.

When he utilizes combined energy, his fighting men become as it were like unto rolling logs

or stones, for it is the nature of a log or stone to remain motionless on level ground,

and to move when on a slope.

If for cornered to come to a standstill, but if round shaped to go rolling down.

Once the energy developed by good fighting men is as the momentum of a round stone rolled

down a mountain thousands of feet in height, so much on the subject of energy.

End of Part V. Part VI, weak points and strong.

Sonsu said, whoever is first in the field and awaits the coming of the enemy will be fresh

for the fight, whoever is second in the field and has to hasten to battle will arrive exhausted.

Therefore the clever combatant imposes his will on the enemy, but does not allow the

enemies will to be imposed on him.

By holding out advantages to him, he can cause the enemy to approach of his own accord, or

by inflicting damage, he can make it impossible for the enemy to draw near.

If the enemy is taking his ease, he can harass him.

If well supplied with food, he can starve him out.

If quietly encamped, he can force him to move.

Part V points which the enemy must hasten to defend, march swiftly to places where you

are not expected.

An army may march great distances without distress if it marches through country where

the enemy is not.

You can be sure of succeeding in your attacks if you only attack places which are undefended.

You can ensure the safety of your defense if you only hold positions that cannot be attacked.

Hence the general is skillful in attack whose opponent does not know what to defend, and

he is skillful in defense whose opponent does not know what to attack.

Oh, divine art of subtlety and secrecy!

Through you we learn to be invisible, through you, inaudible, and hence we can hold the enemies

fate in our hands.

You may advance and be absolutely irresistible if you make for the enemy's weak points.

You may retire and be safe from pursuit if your movements are more rapid than those

of the enemy.

If we wish to fight, the enemy can be forced to an engagement, even though he be sheltered

behind a high rampart and a deep ditch.

All we need do is attack some other place that he will be obliged to relieve.

If we do not wish to fight, we can prevent the enemy from engaging us even though the lines

of our encampment be merely traced out on the ground.

All we need do is throw something odd and unaccountable in his way.

By discovering the enemy's dispositions and remaining invisible ourselves, we can keep

our forces concentrated while the enemies must be divided.

We can form a single united body while the enemy must split up into fractions.

Hence there will be a hole pitted against separate parts of a hole which means that we shall

be many to the enemy's few.

And if we are able thus to attack an inferior force with a superior one, our opponents will

be in dire straits.

The spot where we intend to fight must not be made known, for then the enemy will have

to prepare against a possible attack at several different points.

And his forces being thus distributed in many directions, the numbers we shall have to face

at any given point will be proportionately few.

For should the enemy strengthen his van, he will weaken his rear.

Should he strengthen his rear, he will weaken his van.

Should he strengthen his left, he will weaken his right.

Should he strengthen his right, he will weaken his left.

If he sends reinforcements everywhere, he will everywhere be weak.

Numerical weakness comes from having to prepare against possible attacks.

Numerical strength, from compelling our adversary to make these preparations against us.

Knowing the place and the time of the coming battle, we may concentrate from the greatest distances

in order to fight.

But if neither time nor place be known, then the left wing will be impotent to secure the

right.

The right equally impotent to secure the left.

The van unable to relieve the rear or the rear to support the van.

How much more so if the furtherest proportions of the army are anything under a hundredly

apart, and even the nearest are separated by several lee?

Though according to my estimate the soldiers of UA exceed our own in number, that shall

advantage them nothing in the matter of victory.

I say then that victory can be achieved.

Though the enemy be stronger in numbers, we may prevent him from fighting.

Scheme so as to discover his plans and the likelihood of their success.

Rouse him and learn the principle of his activity or inactivity.

Force him to reveal himself so as to find out his vulnerable spots.

Carefully compare the opposing army with your own, so that you may know where strength is

super abundant and where it is deficient.

In making tactical dispositions, the highest pitch you can attain is to conceal them.

Conceal your dispositions and you will be safe from the prying of the subtlest spies from

the machinations of the wisest brains.

How victory may be produced for them out of the enemy's own tactics?

That is what the multitude cannot comprehend.

All men can see the tactics whereby I conquer, but what none can see is the strategy out

of which victory is evolved.

Do not repeat the tactics which have gained you one victory, but let your methods be regulated

by the infinite variety of circumstances.

Military tactics are like unto water.

For water in its natural course runs away from high places and hastens downwards.

So in war, the way is to avoid what is strong and to strike at what is weak.

Water shapes its course according to the nature of the ground over which it flows.

The soldier works out his victory in relation to the foe whom he is facing.

Therefore, just as water retains no constant shape, in warfare, there are no constant conditions.

He who can modify his tactics in relation to his opponent and thereby succeed in winning

may be called a heaven-born captain.

The five elements, water, fire, wood, metal, earth, are not always equally predominant.

The four seasons make way for each other in turn.

There are short days and long.

The moon has its periods of waning and waxing.

End of Part 6

Recorded in Toronto, Ontario, by Moira Fobidi, October 2006.